IoT Sensor Data Analysis Documentation

1. Overview
This project aims to analyze IoT sensor data, perform exploratory data analysis, identify trends and anomalies, and provide actionable insights through various data visualization techniques.

2. Steps Involved

Step 1: Data Loading and Preprocessing

The IoT sensor data is loaded from a CSV file.

Timestamps are converted to a datetime format for accurate time-based analysis.

Data is sorted chronologically to facilitate time series operations.

Missing values are handled using median imputation to ensure data completeness.

Step 2: Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)

Data structure and summary statistics are examined to understand the dataset.

Descriptive statistics provide insights into sensor value distributions.

Outlier detection is performed using Z-score analysis to identify abnormal sensor readings.

Step 3: Power Consumption Analysis

Total power consumption is calculated for each site.

A bar plot is generated to visualize site-wise power usage, identifying high-consumption areas.

Step 4: Trend and Seasonality Analysis

Time series decomposition is applied to break down data into trend, seasonal, and residual components.

Visualizations are used to understand long-term trends and seasonal patterns.

Step 5: Forecasting Future Power Usage

ARIMA (AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average) model is used to forecast future power consumption.

The model predicts trends based on historical data to facilitate resource planning.

Step 6: Anomaly Detection

Isolation Forest algorithm is used to identify unusual sensor readings.

Detected anomalies are logged for further investigation and system optimization.

Step 7: Clustering Analysis

K-Means clustering groups similar power consumption patterns across sites.

This helps in understanding sensor behavior across different locations.

Step 8: Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)

Power consumption is analyzed on a daily basis to detect patterns across weekdays.

Insights help in identifying peak and off-peak times for better energy management.

Step 9: Interactive Visualization

An interactive line plot is created using Plotly to visualize power consumption trends over time.

Users can explore the data by filtering based on site ID.

3. Challenges Faced

Handling missing timestamps and ensuring data continuity.

Managing large datasets efficiently for time series analysis.

Choosing appropriate machine learning models for anomaly detection and forecasting.

4. Outcomes and Insights

Identification of peak consumption periods across different sites.

Detection of irregular sensor behavior for maintenance and optimization.

Improved understanding of power usage trends for better energy planning.

5. Future Improvements

Implementing real-time streaming analytics for continuous monitoring.

Integration with cloud platforms for scalable data storage and processing.

Applying deep learning techniques for enhanced forecasting accuracy.

6. Deployment Readiness

The solution is fully functional and Dockerized for easy deployment.

A Dockerfile has been created to containerize the application, ensuring reproducibility across different environments.

Steps for deployment:

Install Docker and clone the repository.

Build the Docker image using:

docker build -t iot-sensor-analysis .

Run the container with:

docker run -d -p 5000:5000 iot-sensor-analysis

The application is designed to be scalable and can be deployed on cloud services such as AWS, Azure, or GCP.
